# Notions 
**Verifiable digital credentials VDCs**  are digital, cryptographically secure versions of physical credentials (like driver's licenses, university degrees, or professional certifications) that can be shared and verified electronically without involving the original issuer.

**Mandates** Establish trust with tamper-proof, cryptographically-signed digital contracts that server as a verifiable proof of user's instructions. 


**AP2**:

Definition: common way of secure authentication, validation and authority to transact. Secure & compliant language for transactions between agents and merchants 

Principles:

- *open standard* 
- *authorization* - proof that an user gave an agent authority to make a purchase 
- *authenticity* - enable merchant to be sure that the agent's request reflects the user intent 
- *accountability* - trace accountability for fraudulent or incorrect transactions 

Concepts:

Core concepts 
## *Cart Mandate* 
- Human present at transaction execution time - explicit user autorization for purchase on exact items and price. Proof of intent. 
- Generated by the Merchant based on the user's request, signed by the user with a hardware backed key on device with in-session authentication. To bind user identity with intent. 
- Informtion in the cart mandate:
    - Payer and Payee information - user, merchant and credential provider.
    - Payment method: selected by the Credential Provider and confirmed by the user. 
    - Risk Payload: 3DS risk data ?? 
    - Transaction Details: products, destination, amount and currency
    - Opt. Refundable conditions. 



## *Intent Mandate* 
- Human not present at transaction execution time - conditions under which an AI Agent is allowed to purchase provided by the human client. It gives authority to execute a transaction within defined constraints 
- Generated by the Shopping Agent - based on the user request and cryptographically signed with user owned key 
- Information in the intent mandate:
    - Payer and Payee info
    - Payment Methods
    - Risk Payload
    - Shopping intent - parameters of purchase - product categories, skus etc. 
    - Prompt Payback - agent understanding of intent. 
    - TTL 



## *Payment Mandate* 
- Human present or not - Shared with payment network and issuer - used to signal AI Involvement and user presence to help asses transaction context and avoid fraud detection to refuse payment. 
- Bound to Cart / Intent mandate 
- Shared with the Network/Issuer payment provider  
- Responsible for building trust into the agentic transaction. 
- Contractual conversation - binding digital contract. 
- Information in the mandate:
      - Human present or not signal
      - User consent to share cart / intent mandate to prevent fraud. 
      - Dispute resolution





# Roles:
- User - human delegating to Agent
- User Agent or Shopping Agent - AI Surface, Chat Client.
- User Credential Provider - Digital Wallet entity. 
- Remote Merchant Endpoint - ME - MCP endpoint / A2A Agent of the merchant. 
- Merchat Payment Processor Endpoint - MPP - MCP / A2A implementation may be fullfiled by the merchant. MPP constructs the txn auth message to be send for authorization. 
- Network and Issuer - Provider of payment network and issuer of payment credentials. 


# FLOW Human Present - asking ChatGPT for example
1. Intent Mandate (Chat Question regarding purchase) Make a search via MCP from a chat somewhere - via MCP query tools / resources from VTEX Search API's
2. Agent presents options and agree with user on some products 
3. Once the human agrees a Cart Mandate is issued with the agreed products. What you see is what you pay! 


# FLOW Human not present - for a scheduled task or watching somethign be available 
1. Intent mandate (more detailed than before)
2. Cart Mandate is generated by the agent alone (without any human confirmation within the bounds of the Intent Mandate)




# Questions AI about AP2 

- What's the difference between MCP and A2A ? 
- Does VTEX need to implement some form of MCP tools for getting acces to carts and products? I guess this is the first step proxying for VTEX APi's via MCP or A2A? 
- Should we have a form of locking the cart in MCP ? Do we need to generate a Mandate on VTEX's side when we agree to a cart? CART MANDATE 
- When Doing a scheduled task as buying ticket before they are on sale, when does the actual payment processing happen? Does it happen at the moment the intent is made or at the moment of the actual purchase? Does the agent somehow have a token to make the payment later with your details ? 
- Let's imagine I would ask an AI Chat - to search for some certain item I want, would it also need the website I want if from? How is that decision being made? Should the website have MCP implemented to enable easier interaction with Gemini for example? How can I be sure that me as a merchant will appear as an option for a user wanting to make a purchase of item X via the ChatGPT, Gemini chats? Or should the store have it's own chat to do this? 
- Would AP2 require implementation from Payment Providers ? Or the merchants could approve authenticity of an agent on their own and build 

- For A2A how does agent discovery work? Do you have a list of Known agents which you can work with ? What's the idea here? 
- How does an agent client (ChatGPT chat let's say) interact with existing agents? I guess this is a closed loop thing not like you would discover a website for example to search for information ? 
- Who is the Credentials Provider actually? Google Pay for example ? Or it must be a dedicat Payment Provider like PayU ? Can the merchant have it's on implementation of the credential provider. Should the Credentials Provider be an MCP Server ? To interact with the Shopping Agent? Or a A2A implementation? The payment method seems to be decided by the credential Provider but shouldn't that payment method also be accepted by the merchant? 

- How is the format of an artifact response decided in A2A communication? For example if we were to have a CLient Agent communicating with another Agent for a marketplace online store to search for products, how would the marketplace agent response in a format which products are matching the search criteria? 

- So if I got it right An agent that implements A2A eventually gets to call via MCP to get it's resources so A2A is dependent on MCP ? Can we have A2A without MCP ? Or does the actually Agent Core handle communicaiton with tools and external service and MCP is not required, so maybe via Agent develop kit ? Does this replace MCP ? 

- JSON RPC vs JSON ??? Why RPC A2A ? Why not plain HTTPS ? Does Stream A2A use websockets? 


# Building a MVP of A2P on VTEX
- Credential provider implementation must be done by the payment provider?
- Given that right now payment provider don't specifically accept agent payments, at least not PayU Romania or Netopia, does the payment provider need to know it's an agentic payment? How does 3DS2 come into picture? In the case of a challenge will the user have to provide the challenge in the Shopping Agent (Gemini, chatGpt?)
- The shopping agent may request the credential provider to complete payment with merchant or the merchant / PSP may request payment methods from the credential provider. IF he merchant has a payment method stored for the client, the communication with the Credentials provider may not be needed 
- 






# VTEX Perspective - what we need 
- In order to make VTEX stores available to Shopping Agents (ChatGPT, Gemini, etc) we need an MCP Server with tools to search products, build a cart, maybe make personalized offers based on intent, basically calling the VTEX API via MCP with tools / resources. Inventory checking, pricing, basically the headless VTEX API via MCP. 

- MCP Client that clients can interact with in a marketplace enabling them to make these purchases 
- A way to Lock a cart once we confirm it to an agent - to provide **authenticity** - be sure that the agent request reflects the user's intent. Signing the cart to signal the commitment to fullfil 
- MCP endpoint should: showcase products / services, provide info about products (images, specs), ability to negotiate cart with Shopping Agent. Most importantly confirm intent given by the Agent for right cart items. 

- ME - MCP / A2A implementation for VTEX API's for products and build cart. Provide loyalty, offers, cross-sell, up-sell info. 
- ME - The Merchant must sign the Cart that they create for a user, signaling that they will fulfill this cart.
- MPP - MCP / A2A implementatiom for VTEX Checkout flow. 

- Enable Popular shopping agents (ChatGPT, Gemini) to discover merchant endpoints - VTEX merchant should be on the allow lists of registries with trusted merchants. 
- Think about a way to build the "root of trust" for crypto certificates used to sign mandates. Who should be the issuer in our case? 

## Steps required to have Agentic commerce and AP2 available for VTEX stores

Focus was mainly on the human present scenario and wallet type payment methods like GooglePay / PayPal (which also seem to have early adoption).

1. **Implement MCP Server for VTEX API** in order to enable interaction with ChatGPT/Gemini/Claude. Should basically make headless API's available, tool examples: searchProducts, checkInventory, pricingQuote, shippingQuote, createOrderForm/Cart, addItemToCart, setShippingAddress, setClientProfile, etc. Can be done in VTEX IO with a customApp, like a VTEX API proxy. The only problem is that VTEX response could be a bit token heavy, a lot of VTEX specific data, so we would need to conform to a vendor neutral schema that makes it easier for LLM to understand, so most likely we will need some data transformation.

2. **Implement Agent to Agent Layer - Merchant Agent** in order to enable interaction with shopping agents. Will use the MCP Server for ease of use when needed or VTEX API. Main responsibilities: session start/teardown, cart negotiation, creation & signing of Cart Mandate (required for AP2), Payment Mandate at authorization time, redirect handling for 3DS2 challenge, final order created and mandate verification (require for PSP and Audit)

  **A2A Actions in line with AP2** (listed in the capabilities of the agent, most likely not all just the required ones that I see):

  - searchProducts, createCart, priceCart, shippingOptions -> delegate to MCP createOrderForm, etc
  - previewCart - propose cart with all details and prices + set an expiry
  - createCartMandate - once the user agrees to the cart, we make the first step in the AP2 protocol. Before this step we should have a valid orderForm with products, shipping info, clientDetails and a paymentMethod, negotiated by the client with the ShopperAgent. So in the normal headeless checkout we would have called (add orderForm items, add clientProfile, add shipping). Creating the CartMandate requires the following:
    - Align with existing AP2 types
    - Call VTEX Add Payment Data with GooglePay payment token from the Shopper Agent.
    - Call VTEX Place Order to lock the cart products and prices
    - The shopper agent will ask the user for a payment method - let's say google pay and it will generate some paymentData token to be used later in the process. Similar to clicking pay with GooglePay.
    - Each merchant should have a DID + keypair generated per environment. Public key available via jwks, maybe a did:web for 3rd parties to verify signatures (Audit, PSP fraud detection)
    - Create a cart mandate JSON with required details (products, shipping, payment method info - GooglePay paymentData) - and canonicalize the JSON RFC 8785 to ensure signature stability.
    - Create a hash of the canonicalized Cart Mandate JSON using the generated keypair and persist the artifact somewhere, masterdata.
    - Return the cartMandate digest hash, expiration and key id of the signature key.
  - executePayment -  start the actual payment flow in VTEX given the paymentData from the ShopperAgent:
    - Should check the cartMandate for validity (if price has changed ?? or if the mandate expired )
    - Build a Payment Mandate using the paymentData, risk field info from the wallet (googlePay) according to the AP2 types and sign it with the merchant keys generated. Persist it because we will need it in the future to send it to PSP to avoid fraud and authenticate the agent in the PSP.
    - Call Send payment information and create transaction
    - Call VTEX GatewayCallback to start the payment flow
    - VTEX calls the connector to start the payment process.
    - The payment connector flow is mostly unchanged just that it should be Agent Aware, I don't think we need a custom payment method, normal GooglePay should work. But it should add Agent metadata, payment mandate to the createPayment call in the PSP to pass fraud detection. (Not really supported yet by PSPs but will be in the future so until there just add it to custom metadata for traceability)
    - In this step we could get a 3DS2 challenge, in which case we either return the paymentUrl to the shopperAgent to render the challenge or to redirect to a secure environment.
    - Without challenge we return status: approved if all is good, which challenge undefined and forward the redirect url to the shopper agent.
    - This action should be streamable (keep connection alive) when we have a challenge because we send the challengeURL the shopper agent will render or redirect then if all is good we should get back a response. To be investigate exactly could be also done based on PSP webhook status. Render success and cancel / authorize after we have webhook confirmation.

  **Things to take into consideration:**

  - Further payment flow will be handled using the regular PPP - authorization/capture/refunds/cancellation.
  - We should make sure we have a common id to easily audit the transaction, most likely the transactionId, acros A2A, MCP, VTEX, PSP.
  - If for some reason the payment fails we should cancel the order to release stock.
  - Keep an evidence bundle with audit information about the transaction for disputes (Cart Mandate, Signatures, Digest, Payment Mandate)
  - If the payment fails for some reason (insufficient funds) we should recreate only the PaymentMandate so just the execute payment step. If the payment method is changed, we should recreate the cartMandate - agent calling createCartMandate again.

  One important step will be Agent Discovery, so in order to make VTEX stores available to be queries the Agent Capabilities URL should be added to a list of trusted merchants. This is an important step and I'm not 100% sure how this would work, it's more business related I guess, but otherwise the merchant wouldn't have visibility, it's kinda like having good SEO for your website.

  The Human not Present scenario will on top of all of this have a IntentMandate which describes the rules for the agent to follow when making the purchase but I feel that this scenarios will have later adoption and we should focus on human present first as most of the flow is common, something like subscriptions on top of normal payments.




# Resources 
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/announcing-agents-to-payments-ap2-protocol
https://ap2-protocol.org/#what-is-ap2
https://a2a-protocol.org/latest/